Saturday, July 24, 2010
The Furnace of Akhnai: Story and Puzzle
In studying Jewish law (for a course I teach on legal systems very different from ours), I came across the story of the furnace (or oven) of Akhnai.
In brief:
Rabbi Eliezer disputed with the sages as to whether a clay oven that had become impure, had been broken up, and then reassembled with sand between the pieces, was still impure or, having been broken, was now pure.
After he offered all of his arguments to show that the oven was now pure and they were all rejected, he called upon a carob tree to prove the truth of his position.
The carob tree promptly uprooted itself and was flung a great distance away.
The sages responded that a carob tree had nothing to say in the disputes of legal scholars.
The argument continues, Eliezer is supported by two more miracles, each of which the sages insist is irrelevant.
Finally he asks heaven to support him, and a voice form heaven announces that in all matters of the law Eliezer is correct.
To which one of the sages replies (to God) "It is not in heaven."
Or in other words, "butt out."
To make sense of the story so far, one needs a little background.
Jewish law, like any system based on divine revelation, has an inherent problem with maintaining consistency.
If the law is what God said, and different judges have different interpretations of what that is, then the judges will give different rulings on the same question.
What God said is not determined by majority vote.
Early on, the legal scholars came up with a solution to this problem, based on their interpretation of a passage in the Torah, the first five books of the Old Testament.
What God said was something that each legal scholar could determine for himself.
But if they disagreed, what the law was was determined by majority vote of the scholars.
Better that they risk getting the law wrong than that they end up disagreeing in their judgments.
A scholar who disagreed was free to argue for his position, but when functioning as a judge he had to decide according to the view that had been established by the majority.
The story is happening at the end of a period of several generations in which the legal scholars were divided into two schools, the school of Hillel and the school of Shamai, which disagreed about details of the law but continued to each treat the other as legitimate.
Eliezer was a leading figure in the school of Shamai; the "sages" in the story are scholars of the school of Hillel, which at that point was the larger of the two.
